# Handle Iceberg DataLakehouse tables with DuckDB CLI
## Introduction

DuckDB is an excellent frontend for interacting with **Apache Iceberg** tables organized using **Apache Polaris**. It allows you to run simple SQL statements to manage database objects and their content.

This guide explains how to set up this basic interaction in **Iceduck** and perform your first steps.


## Requirements

To follow this guide, ensure the **Iceduck** environment is installed on your local system. Refer to the [setup guide](https://github.com/pfabrici/iceduck/blob/main/README.md) for detailed instructions.


## The CLI wrapper
Iceduck provides a wrapper script, `bin/duckdb`, which runs the **DuckDB CLI** from a Docker container. This wrapper:

- Manages volumes and environment variables to connect the container session to the **Iceduck** environment.
- Supports **three operation modes**, accessible via the `-h` option:
  - **Execute a SQL file**: Use `-f <FILENAME>` to run a SQL file in DuckDB.
  - **Execute a SQL statement**: Use `-c "<COMMAND>"` to pipe a SQL statement directly to the DuckDB CLI.
  - **Run an interactive DuckDB CLI shell**.
- Utilizes the initialization file: `files/data/duckdb/workspace/init/init.sql` (generated by `prep_duckdb.sh` during `iceduck init`).
- Connects to a **persistent file-based DuckDB database** located at: `files/data/duckdb/workspace/iceduck.duckdb`.
- Prepares a **workspace folder for DuckDB secrets** during the init phase to simplify Data Lake connections.

You can run the wrapper script by executing 
```shell
bin/duckdb
```
from iceducks home folder. This will start an interactive CLI where you can execute DuckDB commands. Start with ```.help``` to get familiar with the CLI options or write DuckDB SQL statement.
```
-- Loading resources from init/init.sql
DuckDB v1.5.3 (Variegata)
Enter ".help" for usage hints.
iceduck D 
```

## Managing Iceberg and Catalog connectivity
Iceduck showcases the use of DuckDB CLI as a client for a DataLakehouse that uses **Apache Iceberg** tables with a S3 comatible storage backend and an **Apache Polaris** REST catalog. For that we have to tell DuckDB where to find the Data Lakehouse.

This is explained in DuckDBs documentation for the [Secret Manager](https://duckdb.org/docs/current/configuration/secrets_manager) and the [Iceberg Extension](https://duckdb.org/docs/current/core_extensions/iceberg/overview). The *Iceberg REST Catalogs* section corresponds to **Apache Polaris**.

To attach the Data Lakehouse to the DuckDB CLI session we will create to secrets and then attach the catalog. We have one secret for the S3 compatible bucket in MinIO and a secret describing the connection to the catalog :

```sql
CREATE PERSISTENT SECRET s3_secret( 
    TYPE s3, 
    KEY_ID getenv('AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID'), 
    SECRET getenv('AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY'), 
    REGION getenv('AWS_REGION'), 
    ENDPOINT getenv('AWS_ENDPOINT'), 
    URL_STYLE 'path', 
    USE_SSL 'false' 
);

CREATE PERSISTENT SECRET polaris_secret(  
    TYPE iceberg , 
    CLIENT_ID getenv('POLARIS_ROOT_CLIENT_ID'), 
    CLIENT_SECRET getenv('POLARIS_ROOT_CLIENT_SECRET'), 
    ENDPOINT 'http://rest:8181/api/catalog' 
);

ATTACH 'polariscatalog' AS warehouse (  TYPE ICEBERG , ACCESS_DELEGATION_MODE none );
```

Depending on the the secret type ( s3 or iceberg ) different variables need to be set. Refer to DuckDB documentation to find out which of them are mandatory.

You can run the secret generation by executing : 
```shell
bin/duckdb -f files/scripts/duckdb/01_prepare.sql 
```
from iceducks home folder. The wrapper takes care of setting the correct environment variables that are used in the SQL statements.

The secrets will be stored in the filesystem and therefore will be available for future use in other DuckDB sessions.

You can check if the creation of the secrets have been successful by running the wrapper again and running a select on duckdb_secrets():
```shell
bin/duckdb
-- Loading resources from init/init.sql
DuckDB v1.5.3 (Variegata)
Enter ".help" for usage hints.
iceduck D select * from duckdb_secrets();
```

Alternatively try 
```shell
bin/duckdb -c "select * from duckdb_secrets();"
```

## Creating a Schema and Tables

With the wrapper and the secrets in place we can now focus on working with the Data Lakehouse. Lets create a schema, some tables and lets try to put some data into them.

```sql
ATTACH 'polariscatalog' AS warehouse (  TYPE ICEBERG , ACCESS_DELEGATION_MODE none );

CREATE SCHEMA IF NOT EXISTS warehouse.iceduck;
CREATE TABLE IF NOT EXISTS warehouse.iceduck.visitors (
    visit_timestamp TIMESTAMP,
    visitor         VARCHAR(20),
    description     VARCHAR(50)
);
```

After attaching the catalog to the session we can simply create database objects by using common SQL DDL Syntax. 
Use 

```shell
bin/duckdb -f files/scripts/duckdb/02_create_objects.sql
```
to create schema and table. Afterwards you can check the creation of the empty table in the [MinIO console](http://localhost:9001/browser/warehouse/iceduck)

## Limits

Keep in mind that you can only run common SQL statements on the Iceberg tables from the DuckDB CLI. It is not possible to execute specific tag, branch or file query operations.

